[GeoMechanicsApplication] Added a 3D dynamic test case (#12656)
KratosMultiphysics/Kratos: applications/GeoMechanicsApplication/tests/test_dynamic/test_constant_point_load_3d/README.md

# Test Cases for Dynamic solution in 3D

**Author:** [Mohamed Nabi](https://github.com/mnabideltares)

**Source files:** [Dynamic solution in 3D](https://github.com/KratosMultiphysics/Kratos/tree/master/applications/GeoMechanicsApplication/tests/test_dynamic/test_constant_point_load_3d)

## Case Specification

> In this test case, a three-dimentional soil block with dimensions of 10 m x 10 m x 10 m is considered. This is a quart of the full domain, as this case is axisymmetric. The pressure is fixed at 0 Pa throughout the entire simulation to eliminate the effect of water pressure. This is done to allow comparison of our results with published semi-analytical solutions. The bottom side of the domain is fixed, while the vertical sides are allowed to move only in the tangential directions. A sudden force of -250 N is then applied in the vertical direction at the top surface of the block. The simulation spans 1 second. This test is conducted on a mesh with triangular elements of type 3D4N. The deformation at the surface is then compared with semi-analytical results.

Reviewer: triangular elements are 2D. Here tetrahedral elements are used.

> In this test case, a three-dimentional soil block with dimensions of 10 m x 10 m x 10 m is considered. This is a quart of the full domain, as this case is axisymmetric. The pressure is fixed at 0 Pa throughout the entire simulation to eliminate the effect of water pressure. This is done to allow comparison of our results with published semi-analytical solutions. The bottom side of the domain is fixed, while the vertical sides are allowed to move only in the tangential directions. A sudden force of -250 N is then applied in the vertical direction at the top surface of the block. The simulation spans 1 second. This test is conducted on a mesh with triangular elements of type 3D4N. The deformation at the surface is then compared with semi-analytical results.

Reviewer 2: Some typos/suggestions
```suggestion
In this test case, a three-dimensional soil block with dimensions of 10 m x 10 m x 10 m is considered. This is a quarter of the full domain, as this case is axisymmetric. The pressure is fixed at 0 Pa throughout the entire simulation to eliminate the effect of water pressure. This is done to allow comparison of our results with published semi-analytical solutions. The bottom side of the domain is fixed, while the vertical sides are allowed to move only in the tangential directions. A sudden force of -250 N is then applied in the vertical direction at the top surface of the block. The simulation spans 1 second. This test is conducted on a mesh with tetrahedral elements of type 3D4N. The deformation at the surface is then compared with semi-analytical results.
```

> In this test case, a three-dimentional soil block with dimensions of 10 m x 10 m x 10 m is considered. This is a quart of the full domain, as this case is axisymmetric. The pressure is fixed at 0 Pa throughout the entire simulation to eliminate the effect of water pressure. This is done to allow comparison of our results with published semi-analytical solutions. The bottom side of the domain is fixed, while the vertical sides are allowed to move only in the tangential directions. A sudden force of -250 N is then applied in the vertical direction at the top surface of the block. The simulation spans 1 second. This test is conducted on a mesh with triangular elements of type 3D4N. The deformation at the surface is then compared with semi-analytical results.

Reviewer 2: It's probably a gap in my knowledge, but I thought axisymmetric meant we have a 2D domain, which we then make 'semi-3D' by rotating it around an axis. 

Extending on that logic, a 3D axisymmetric case would become 'semi-4D', which I think does not make sense, so I must be missing something

> The geometry and boundary conditions are shown below:

Reviewer: the Dirichlet boundary conditions are not in the picture ( and would be a lot of work to show clearly ). Therefore I propose to only mention the geometry and  loading conditions. Not the boundary conditions.

Author: Done

> <img src="../documentation_data/test_constant_point_load_3d_conditions.svg" alt="Visualization of the geometry and the boundary conditions" title="Visualization of the geometry and the boundary conditions" width="800">

Reviewer 2: I might be an idea to show where the axis is around which the block is axisymmetric

Author: Done

The shear wave velocity $c_s$ and compression wave velocity $c_p$ can be calculated as:

$$ c_s = \sqrt{\frac{G}{\rho}} $$

$$ c_p = \sqrt{\frac{M}{\rho}} $$

where $G$ and $M$ are shear modulus and P-wave modulus, respectively. They are defined as:

$$ G = \frac{E}{2  \left(1 + \nu \right)} $$

$$ M = \frac{E \left(1 - \nu \right)}{\left( 1 + \nu \right) \left(1 - 2 \nu \right)} $$

- $G$		= Shear modulus $\mathrm{[Pa]}$

> - $M$		= P-wave modulus  $\mathrm{[Pa]}$

Reviewer: I'm guessing that the usual name for this is bulk modulus ( mostly denoted as K ) or is it one of the 2 constants of Lame that usually have Greek symbols lambda and mu? If we are following the notation used by Verruit.we shouldn't change it.

- $E$		= Young's modulus  $\mathrm{[Pa]}$
- $\nu$		= Poisson's ratio  $\mathrm{[-]}$
- $\rho$	= Mass density $\mathrm{[kg/m^3]}$

> In this test case, $E = 91800 \mathrm{Pa}$ and $\nu = 0.25$. This leads to shear and compression wave velocities of $6 \mathrm{m/s}$ and $10.39 \mathrm{m/s}$, respectively. Hence, in order to avoid the effects of reflecting waves from the boundaries, considering a domain of $10 \mathrm{m} × 10 \mathrm{m} × 10 \mathrm{m}$ with a simulation time of 1 second is sufficient.

Reviewer: With 10.39 m/s and a distance of 10m, the wave starts to reflect at 10/10.39 s which is less than the computed 1 s.

Author: You are right, there may happen a slight reflection at the end, but as it is just a fraction of time, we don't observe it. The reflection may affect the very end points of the figure.
Tried 20m domain, but the results did not change much around 1s

> In this test case, $E = 91800 \mathrm{Pa}$ and $\nu = 0.25$. This leads to shear and compression wave velocities of $6 \mathrm{m/s}$ and $10.39 \mathrm{m/s}$, respectively. Hence, in order to avoid the effects of reflecting waves from the boundaries, considering a domain of $10 \mathrm{m} × 10 \mathrm{m} × 10 \mathrm{m}$ with a simulation time of 1 second is sufficient.

Reviewer: 91800 seems a strange number in [Pa] I would expect something in the order of 80 MPa.

Author: I do agree that a such number does not make much sense practically. We used it just to compare.

## Results

The picture below illustrates the variation in vertical displacement over time for node 9307, which is 2.94 meters away from the loading point (at coordinate of $x = 2.94$, $y = 0$ and $z = 0$). The results are compared with the semi-analytical solution. The semi-analytical solution is based on the following publication:

<em> An Introduction to Soil Dynamics , Verruijt A., 2009, Delft University of Technology, Chapter 13.2 </em>

<img src="../documentation_data/test_constant_point_load_3d_results.png" alt="The vertical displacement, compared with semi-analytical solution" title="Temperature within the box width at the last time step" width="600">

> In the semi-analytical solution, there is a singulair point around $\tau = 1.1$. However, this behavior, which is caused by the arrival of the Rayleigh wave, is captured by a peak in the numerical solution. 

Reviewer 2: To me, this sentence is not completely clear to me yet. Is the point that it's no singular point, but a more smooth peak because this is a numerical simulation?

> Note: To avoid numerical oscillations, the force is gradually applied over a time span of 0.1 seconds.

Reviewer: On a total time of 1 s the 0.1 for the increase seems rather long. That may have an influence on what you describe as shift in time for the peak behavior. Is the same ramping time used in the 2D computation?

Author: In the case of < 0.1, the results even shift more to the left side. for the case of > 0.1, the peak becomes smoother but not much shifts to the right

## Case Specification
In this test case, a three-dimensional soil block with dimensions of 10 m x 10 m x 10 m is considered. This is a quarter of the full domain, as the physical problem is axisymmetric. The pressure is fixed at 0 Pa throughout the entire simulation to eliminate the effect of water pressure. This is done to allow comparison of our results with published semi-analytical solutions. A sudden force of -250 N is then applied in the vertical direction at the top surface of the block. The simulation spans 1 second. This test is conducted on a mesh with tetrahedral elements of type 3D4N. The deformation at the surface is then compared with semi-analytical results.

The geometry and boundary conditions are shown below:

<img src="../documentation_data/test_constant_point_load_3d_conditions.svg" alt="Visualization of the geometry and the boundary conditions" title="Visualization of the geometry and the boundary conditions" width="800">

The shear wave velocity $c_s$ and compression wave velocity $c_p$ can be calculated as:

$$ c_s = \sqrt{\frac{G}{\rho}} $$

$$ c_p = \sqrt{\frac{M}{\rho}} $$

> where $G$ and $M$ are shear modulus and bulk modulus, respectively. They are defined as:

Reviewer: bulk modulus -> P wave modulus.

$$ G = \frac{E}{2  \left(1 + \nu \right)} $$

$$ M = \frac{E \left(1 - \nu \right)}{\left( 1 + \nu \right) \left(1 - 2 \nu \right)} $$

- $G$		= Shear modulus $\mathrm{[Pa]}$

> - $M$		= Bulk modulus  $\mathrm{[Pa]}$

Reviewer: M is the P wave modulus. See e.g. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lam%C3%A9_parameters that is different from the bulk modulus usually denoted with K
